Title: A fast ultra performance supercritical fluid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometric method for profiling of targeted phytosterols

Abstract: Phytosterols are essential structural components of plant cell membranes and possess health-related benefits, including lowering blood cholesterol levels in humans. Numerous analytical methods are being used to profile plant and animal sterols. Chromatography hyphenated to tandem mass spectrometry, is a better option due to its specificity, selectivity, and sensitivity. An ultra-performance supercritical fluid chromatography hyphenated with atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) tandem mass spectrometric method was developed and evaluated for fingerprint analysis of seven phytosterols. Mass spectrometry fragmentation behavior was used for phytosterol identification, and multiple reaction monitoring scanning was utilized for phytosterol confirmation, where APCI outperformed superiority in terms of ion intensity, particularly in the production of [M + H-H2O]+ ions rather than [M + H]+ ions. The chromatographic conditions were thoroughly evaluated, and the ionization parameters were optimized as well. In a 3 min. run, the seven phytosterols were separated concurrently. The calibration and repeatability tests were conducted to check the instrument's performance, and the results indicated that all of the phytosterols tested had correlation coefficients (r2) greater than 0.9911 over the concentration range of 5–5000 ng/mL. The limit of quantification was below 20 ng/mL for all the tested analytes except for stigmasterol and campesterol. The partially validated method was applied for the evaluation of phytosterols in pure coconut oil and palm oil in order to demonstrate its applicability. Total sterols in coconut and palm oils were 126.77 ng/mL and 101.73 ng/mL, respectively. In comparison to earlier methods of phytosterol analysis, the novel method offers a far faster, more sensitive, and more selective analytical process.