Title: Performance comparison of narrow-bore and capillary liquid-chromatography for non-targeted metabolomics profiling by HILIC-QTOF-MS

Abstract: Clinical metabolomics studies often have to cope with limited sample amounts, thus miniaturized liquid chromatography (LC) systems are a promising alternative. Their applicability has already been demonstrated in various fields, including a few metabolomics studies that mainly used reversed-phase chromatography. However, hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC), which is widely used in metabolomics due to its particular suitability for the analysis of polar molecules, has rarely been tested for miniaturized LC-MS analysis of small molecules.
                  In the present work, the suitability of a capillary HILIC (CapHILIC)-QTOF-MS system for non-targeted metabolomics was evaluated based on extracts of porcine formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples. The performance was assessed with respect to the number and retention time span of metabolic features as well as the analytical repeatability, the signal-to-noise ratio and the signal intensity of 16 annotated metabolites from different compound classes. The results were compared with a well established narrow-bore HILIC-QTOF-MS system. Both platforms have detected a similar number of features and performed excellent with respect to retention time stability (median RT span <0.05 min) and analytical repeatability (>75% of features with CV < 20%). The signal areas of all metabolites assessed were increased up to 18-fold by the use of CapHILIC, although the signal-to-noise ratio was only improved for 50% of the metabolites. An even better reproducibility (median CV = 5.2%) and up to 80-fold increase in signal intensity were observed after optimization of CapHILIC conditions for analysis of bile acid standard solutions. Even though the observed improvement for specific bile acids (e.g. taurocholic acid) in biological matrix needs to be evaluated, the platform comparison indicates, that the tested CapHILIC system is particularly suitable for analyses of a less broad metabolite spectrum, and specifically optimized chromatography.