Title: Method development for the acquisition of adsorption isotherm of ion pair reagents Tributylamine and Triethylamine in ion pair chromatography

Abstract: Tributylamine (TBuA) and triethylamine (TEtA) are the most commonly used ion pair reagents in ion pair chromatography especially for the analysis of oligonucleotides. In order to improve the understanding of the retention and separation mechanism of oligonucleotides in ion pair chromatography, it is important to understand the retention mechanism and the nature of interaction of these ion pair reagents with the stationary phase in the chromatographic column. Adsorption isotherm is helpful in evaluating such interactions, and subsequently predicting the retention mechanism. Alkylamines are very polar molecules which lack suitable chromophore and are commonly present in charged forms. Therefore, their determination and the subsequent acquisition of their adsorption isotherms using traditional liquid chromatography is very difficult. In this study, we first developed an analytical method for the determination of TBuA and TEtA in a typical chromatographic mobile phase (acetonitrile-water) and then used the same method to acquire the adsorption isotherms for tributylammonium acetate (TBuAA) and triethylammonium acetate (TEtAA). This method started with the conversion of the alkylammonium ions to free neutral forms by treating the sample with a strong base, followed by pentane-mediated extraction and finally the analysis of the extracts using gas chromatography-flame ionization detector (GC-FID). This three-step method was validated for parameters like range, linearity, intra-day and inter-day precision and accuracy, limit of detection and limit of quantitation. For the adsorption isotherms, the C18 column was first equilibrated with the solutions having different concentrations of alkylammonium ions and then stripped with eluent devoid of alkylammonium ions. Several stripping eluents were investigated and it was discovered that the eluent requirement could be decreased by the addition of sodium chloride. The effluents from the stripping phase were collected and analyzed using the developed analytical method to acquire the adsorption data. Under the investigated conditions, adsorption of TBuAA and TEtAA showed type III and type I isotherm behavior respectively.