Title: Development of a unified gradient theory for ion-pair chromatography using oligonucleotide separations as a model case

Abstract: Ion-pair chromatography is the de facto standard for separating oligonucleotides and related impurities, particularly for analysis but also often for small-scale purification. Currently, there is limited understanding of the quantitative modeling of both analytical and overloaded elution profiles obtained during gradient elution in ion-pair chromatography. Here we will investigate a recently introduced gradient mode, the so-called ion-pairing reagent gradient mode, for both analytical and overloaded separations of oligonucleotides. The first part of the study demonstrates how the electrostatic theory of ion-pair chromatography can be applied for modeling gradient elution of oligonucleotides. When the ion-pair gradient mode is used in a region where the electrostatic surface potential can be linearized, a closed-form expression of retention time can be derived. A unified retention model was then derived, applicable for both ion-pair reagent gradient mode as well as co-solvent gradient mode. The model was verified for two different experimental systems and homo- and heteromeric oligonucleotides of different lengths. Quantitative modeling of overloaded chromatography using the ion-pairing reagent gradient mode was also investigated. Firstly, a unified adsorption isotherm model was developed for both gradient modes. Then, adsorption isotherms parameter of a model oligonucleotide and two major synthetic impurities were estimated using the inverse method. Secondly, the parameters of the adsorption isotherm were then used to investigate how the productivity of oligonucleotide varies with injection volume, gradient slope, and initial retention factor. Here, the productivity increased when using a shallow gradient slope combined with a low initial retention factor. Finally, experiments were conducted to confirming some of the model predictions. Comparison with the conventional co-solvent gradient mode showed that the ion-pairing reagent gradient leads to both higher yield and productivity while consuming less co-solvent.