Title: Use graphene coated silica core shell particles to provide rapid, precise, and equivalent chemical composition distribution analysis for polyolefin materials by high temperature thermal gradient interaction chromatography

Abstract: High temperature thermal gradient interaction chromatography (HT-TGIC) has been widely used to measure chemical composition distribution due to its applicability to separate crystalline and non-crystalline amorphous polyolefin materials. The compatibility of HT-TGIC with various detectors (infrared (IR), light scattering (LS), and viscometer) has also allowed a comprehensive analysis of molecular architecture of polyolefin and recycled plastics. The introduction of an easy-to-fabricate graphene coated onto non-porous silica particles as HT-TGIC column in 2020 showed a superior chromatographic performance over the traditional graphite column. A reduction in peak broadness (∼47 %) under identical experimental conditions was demonstrated in that research. This paper similarly uses a graphene column but with the focus on optimization of experimental parameters (concentration, and thermal cooling and heating rates etc.). Equivalent chemical composition distribution (CCD) data to that obtained by the incumbent graphite column over a wide range of polyolefins products was achieved, in addition to a shortened analysis time from 120 min down to 88 min per sample. The materials studied included semicrystalline linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE), elastomers, terpolymers, model blends to mimic recycled plastics. The results also suggest that the elimination of substrate pores enable a better HT-TGIC separation. Coupling the ease and reproducibility of the graphene column fabrication process enables long term chromatographic robustness. This not only results in equivalent CCD data compared to the traditional graphite column but also a 27 % reduction in analysis time. These results demonstrate a substantial advancement of technology in the high throughput industrial laboratory setting where fast testing turnaround time is critical. In addition, simple fabrication with commercially available silica particles and graphene nanopowder provides a cost-effective approach to make HT-TGIC columns reproducibly.