Title: Two-dimensional separation of water-soluble polymers using size exclusion and reversed phase chromatography employing capillary-channeled polymer fiber columns

Abstract: Polymeric materials are readily available, durable materials that have piqued the interest of many diverse fields, ranging from biomedical engineering to construction. The physiochemical properties of a polymer dictate the behavior and function, where large polydispersity among polymer properties can lead to problems; however, current polymer analysis methods often only report results for one particular property. Two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2DLC) applications have become increasingly popular due to the ability to implement two chromatographic modalities in one platform, meaning the ability to simultaneously address multiple physiochemical aspects of a polymer sample, such as functional group content and molar mass. The work presented employs size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and reversed-phase (RP) chromatography, through two coupling strategies: SEC x RP and RP x RP separations of the water-soluble polymers poly(methacrylic acid) (PMA) and polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSSA). Capillary-channeled polymer (C-CP) fiber (polyester and polypropylene) stationary phases were used for the RP separations. Particularly attractive is the fact that they are easily implemented as the second dimension in 2DLC workflows due to their low backpressure (<1000 psi at ∼70 mm sec−1) and fast separation times. In-line multi-angle light scattering (MALS) was also implemented for molecular weight determinations of the polymer samples, with the molecular weight of PMA ranging from 5 × 104 to 2 × 105 g mol−1, while PSSA ranges from 105 to 108 g mol−1. While the orthogonal pairing of SEC x RP addresses polymer sizing and chemistry, this approach is limited by long separation times (80 min), the need for high solute concentrations (PMA = 1.79 mg mL−1 and PSSA = 0.175 mg mL−1 to yield comparable absorbance responses) due to on-column dilution and subsequently limited resolution in the RP separation space. With RP x RP couplings, separation times were significantly reduced (40 min), with lower sample concentrations (0.595 mg mL−1 of PMA and 0.05 mg mL−1 of PSSA) required. The combined RP strategy provided better overall distinction in the chemical distribution of the polymers, yielding 7 distict species versus 3 for the SEC x RP coupling.