Title: Inline phase transition trapping-selective supercritical fluid extraction-supercritical fluid chromatography: A green and efficient integrated method for determining prohibited substances in cosmetics

Abstract: Background
                  Developing an environmentally friendly and efficient integrated analytical approach is a cutting-edge topic in current analytical science. Due to the unique properties of supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2), online supercritical fluid extraction-supercritical fluid chromatography (SFE-SFC) is developing rapidly and has been widely applied in many fields. However, it still faces several challenges such as peak broadening and matrix interference. In order to solve the problems, we developed an inline phase transition trapping-selective supercritical fluid extraction-supercritical fluid chromatography (PTT-SSFE-SFC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) method in this study.
               
                  Results
                  This method integrated extraction, purification, separation, and detection, which was applied to determine 114 prohibited substances in cosmetics within 33 min, covering ten categories. The PTT strategy trapped the extracts on the head of the column by transforming CO2 from a supercritical state to a gaseous state, preventing peak spreading and improving sensitivity. Several adsorbents were tested when analyzing aqueous samples to reduce matrix interference and absorb water. Compared with conventional online SFE-SFC, this method improved the matrix effects of 93 and 87 target substances in the toner and mask matrix, respectively. Because the integrated method reduced sample loss, it achieved high sensitivity with LODs ranging from 0.00104 μg L−1 to 3.09 μg L−1. Furthermore, compared with other reported green methods, the inline method showed advantages in automation, efficiency, sample amount, and waste volume.
               
                  Significance and novelty
                  With the introduction of the PTT strategy and the adsorbent, the system obtained good peak shapes, high sensitivity, low matrix effect, and good recovery. Based on the results, inline PTT-SSFE-SFC-MS/MS as a green and efficient integrated method has great potential for analyzing low abundance and multiple categories of targets in complex samples.