Title: Separation of planar chiral ferrocenes by capillary electrokinetic chromatography and liquid chromatography

Abstract: Capillary electrokinetic chromatography (CEKC) and liquid chromatography (LC) methods were explored for the enantiomeric separation of six unsymmetrically disubstituted ferrocene derivatives. In normal-phase mode liquid chromatography, the use of n-heptane, ethanol or isopropanol with 1% n-butylamine as mobile phase on six polysaccharide-based columns, allowed to fully separate the enantiomers of three compounds out of the six (i.e 7-chloro-N-(2-((dimethylamino)methyl)ferrocenyl)quinolin-4-amine (ferroquine) (compound 1), 1-[(1S)-(1-Aminoethyl)]-2-(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene (compound 5) and 1-[(1R)-1-(Dicyclohexylphosphino)ethyl]-2-(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene (compound 6). Among the columns used, the Lux i-Cellulose-5 was the most effective. In capillary electrokinetic chromatography, a phosphate buffer of 25 mM concentration and pH equal to 2.5 was chosen as background electrolyte, leading to cationic ferrocene derivatives. The addition of neutral cyclodextrins was undertaken first and native β- or γ-cyclodextrins were found to resolve the enantiomers of two derivatives. Then, 15 mM of anionic cyclodextrins were added to the background electrolyte. The use of SBE-β-CD, S-β-CD or S-γ-CD have allowed the separation of the enantiomers for most of the ferrocene derivatives studied with high resolution values in short migration time. For instance, for 1-(R)-2-(Diphenylphosphino)ethyldi-tert-butylphosphine ferrocene (compound 2), the migration times were less than 2 minutes and the resolution value was equal to 3.52 in short-end mode with 15 mM S-β-CD, at 25 kV and 25°C. Finally, a dual cyclodextrins system was tested using 15 mM of S-β-CD plus 15 mM HP-γ-CD in the phosphate buffer. This system allowed the improved separation of two ferrocene derivatives with an unusual resolution value equal to 41.5 in long-end mode. Overall, CEKC showed better enantioseparating power of the six chiral ferrocenes studied than liquid chromatography.