Title: Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis and uv absorptivity of bio-oils extracted from some locally grown plant seeds in nothern Nigeria

Abstract: Oils play vital roles in various ramifications including health, and food industries. Oils which are components of plant seeds can be extracted using various extraction techniques. This research is an exposition into the chemistry of oils with possible repositioning for purposeful use in the cosmetic, pharmaceutical, and food industries especially as sunscreen. In this work, oils were extracted from nine different seeds and subjected to gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry, and Ultraviolet analysis. The extraction method adopted in this work shows that 5 out of the 9 seeds have a relatively high percentage yield ranging from 20.9 to 36.8 % which indicates their potential for use in commercial quantity. The GC- MS analysis shows that (Z, Z)- 9, 12-Octadecadienoic acid is the most abundant components of all the oil samples. n-Hexadecanoic acid and cis-Vaccenic acid are the major constituents of Swietenia macrophylla (mahogany) seed oil. The lead components in the oil samples are usually responsible for their physico-chemical and Ultraviolet interactivities. All the samples were found to have adequate absorbance for Ultraviolet radiation ranging from Ultraviolet C to Ultraviolet A region. Citrullus lanatus, Hyptis spicigera, and Swietenia macrophylla (mahogany) have the highest absorbance ranges of 1.394–1.718, 1.449 to 1.70,2 and 1.402 to 1.711 respectively at Ultraviolet A region. The finding shows that all the samples have the ability to protect the skin from Ultraviolet radiation when expose to the sun, whereas only Citrullus lanatus, Hyptis spicigera and Swietenia macrophylla (mahogany) have the potentials for use as sunscreen with high sun protection factor. Further studies on the antimicrobial activities, cosmeceutical and nutraceutical potentials of the various components of these samples are encouraged.