Title: Evaluation of control of additive concentration in gradient analysis of supercritical fluid chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometry

Abstract: Mobile phase additives are used to improve retention behavior in chromatography. In supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC), for which supercritical fluid carbon dioxide (SF-CO2) is used as the main mobile phase, additives can only be added into the modifier. For that reason, when gradient analysis is performed by changing the modifier ratio to SF-CO2, the additive concentration in the mobile phase increases in parallel with the modifier ratio. In a preliminary study performed using the conventional SFC system, ammonium acetate was necessary to improve the peak shape of a polar steroid, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), while the peak intensity of a non-polar steroid, progesterone, decreased by 78% compared to that in the absence of the additive in mobile phase when gradient elution was performed. Since ammonium acetate had both favorable and unfavorable effects on sensitive and simultaneous analysis of these two steroid compounds, a compromise between these effects had to be sought. A three-pump configuration of SFC was developed by adding a pump unit to SFC instrument, which enabled control of the additive concentration independently of the modifier ratio, for the purpose of investigating the additive effect in detail using both steroids as model compounds. The putative cause of the decrease in peak intensity of progesterone was excessively elevated additive concentration in gradient analysis. When the additive concentration in the mobile phase was controlled to ensure that it did not increase during gradient analysis, the peak intensities of progesterone, cortisol, corticosterone, and testosterone were 55%, 40%, 25%, and 17% higher than when the additive concentration was not controlled, respectively. On the other hand, the peak intensity of DHEA-S was almost identical between the conditions, with an increase of 2% with three-pump instrument. The three-pump configuration showed the potential to solve problems relating to the use of modifier additives by keeping their concentration constant in gradient SFC analysis.