Title: Trace element levels and bio-active compounds in ethanolic leaf extract of Chrysophyllum albidum characterised using gas chromatography – mass spectrometry

Abstract: Aim and objectives
                  
                     Chrysophyllum albidum, also known as Africa star apple, has so many ethnobotanical uses in African healing system. Thus, a study that reveals possible trace elements and its phytochemical profile will give an essential insight to the bioactivity profile of the plant. The study was to identify the trace elements and the bioactive compounds present in Chrysophyllum albidum (C. albidum) leaf extract
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The ethanol leaf extract of Chrysophyllum albidum was evaluated for trace elements using an Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (ASS) while the chemical composition was analysed using Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS). The identification of phytoconstituents using GC/MS was based on the instrument library, peak area and retention time.
               
                  Result
                  The ethanol leaf extract of C. albidum showed a high content of potassium, calcium, magnesium and sodium, while relative low content of manganese, iron, copper, zinc, lead and nickel. Total of 30 peaks representing 30 identified compounds were recorded in the GC/MS analysis. These include a variety of heterocyclic compounds such as fatty acids, organic compounds, esters, and disaccharides etc. The major constituents of the extract were: Sucrose (37.45%), followed by 1,2,3-Propanetriol,1-acetate (7.86%), di-Glyceraldehyde dimer (5.70%), 1-(3-Benzyl-2-thioureido)−1-deoxy-beta-d glucopyranose 2,3,4,6-tetraacetate (4.53%), 4 H-Pyran-4-one, 2,3-dihydro-3, 5-dihydroxy-6-methyl- (4.49%), 3-Deoxy-d-Mannoic lactone (3.14%), Glycerine (3.04%) and minor compounds that are less than 3%.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The elemental composition of the leaf extract of C. albidum may be influenced by the environmental factors such as soil composition surrounding the plant’s roots, while a variety of bioactive compounds with diverse biological activities were present. Hence, the plant have a potential pharmacological activities.