Title: A comparative study on the uptake of lanthanides from acidic feeds using extraction chromatography resins containing N,N,N’,N’-tetra-n-alkyl diglycolamides with varying alkyl chain lengths in an ionic liquid

Abstract: A comparative study on the uptake of several rare earth element (REE) ions viz. La(III), Ce(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Gd(III) and Dy(III) was carried out from nitric acid feeds using four extraction chromatography resins which contained the diglycolamide (DGA) ligands, N,N,N’,N’-tetra-n-alkyldiglycolamide with n-pentyl (TPDGA), n-hexyl (THDGA), n-octyl (TODGA) and n-decyl (TDDGA) groups taken in a room temperature ionic liquid (C4mim·NTf2). The uptake of the lanthanides followed the trend: La(III) < Ce(III) < Pr(III) < Nd(III) < Sm(III) < Gd(III) < Dy(III), which is similar to their ionic potential values and the uptake trend of the resins was TPDGA > THDGA > TODGA > TDDGA. The uptake of the metal ions was very high (>104 g/mL) for all the lanthanide ions and was found to increase with increasing nitric acid concentrations. Based on the encouraging batch data, column studies were carried out with all the four extraction chromatography resins with the lanthanide ions used in this work. The column studies were carried out with both individual lanthanide ions and their mixtures. While the loading studies were carried out with 80 mg/L solutions of the metal ions (with respect to each of those) in the mixture of REEs, the elution studies were carried out using a solution of 0.05 M EDTA in 1 M guanidine carbonate. For the column studies involving individual REEs, 550 mg/L solutions were used. The elution profiles appeared to be sharp as >95% elution of the metal ions was accomplished in only 3 mL of the eluent which amounted to only 1.6 bed volumes which is highly impressive. When the studies were carried out with the mixture of the lanthanide ions, the breakthrough of Dy(III) was last while that of La(III) was seen at much lower volumes which was dependent on the nature of the extractant in the resins.