Title: High performance thin layer chromatography based chemo profiling of Ashvagandharishta and its antidepressant activity

Abstract: Withania somnifera (L.) has long been used as a traditional rasayana herb against a variety of human ailments. This research presents a high performance thin layer chromatography based chemo profiling of Ashvagandharishta and its antidepressant activity. The in-house formulation was made using a fermentation process according to the Indian Pharmacopoeia. Physiochemical standardization of the formulation was performed using different quality control parameters such as total ash, acid insoluble ash, alcohol soluble extract value and water soluble extract value. A column chromatography and high performance thin layer chromatography method was used to isolate and estimation of withanolide-A, withaferin-A & β-sitosterol from the root of W. somnifera. In addition. The antidepressant effect of different formulations were carried out by force swimming test in albino mice. The thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and Glutathione (GSH) assay was used to find out the oxidative stress. W. somnifera root has been standardized macroscopically, microscopically, physico-chemically according to the guidelines of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia. The qualitative and quantitative analysis was performed using high performance thin layer chromatography and it was performed on each formulation and found the content of withanolide-A and -sitosterol in the in-house formulation is higher while withaferin-A is rather contained in the decoction. The antidepressant effect showed that the immobility time was lowest in the case of the standard formulation followed by in house formulation, while the increase in glutathione and the reduction in thiobarbituric acid reactive substances levels revealed the antioxidant nature of the formulation. In conclusion, based on the above results, we can conclude that Ashvagandharishta could be a breakthrough for the treatment of depression in the future.