Title: An off-line three-dimensional liquid chromatography/Q-Orbitrap mass spectrometry approach enabling the discovery of 1561 potentially unknown ginsenosides from the flower buds of Panax ginseng, Panax quinquefolius and Panax notoginseng

Abstract: To comprehensively elucidate the herbal metabolites is crucial in natural products research to discover new lead compounds. Ginsenosides are an important class of bioactive components from the Panax plants exerting the significant tonifying effects. However, to identify new ginsenosides by the conventional strategies trends to be more and more difficult because of the large spans of acid-base property (the neutral and acidic saponins), molecular mass (400–1400 Da), and rather low content. Herein, an off-line multidimensional chromatography/high-resolution mass spectrometry approach was presented: ion exchange chromatography (IEC) as the first dimension of separation, hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) in the second dimension, and reversed-phase chromatography (RPC) for the third dimension which was hyphenated to a Q Exactive Q-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. By applying to the flower buds of P. ginseng (PGF), P. quinquefolius (PQF), and P. notoginseng (PNF), IEC using a PhenoSphereTM SAX column could fractionate the total extracts into the neutral (unretained) and acidic (retained) fractions, while HILIC (an XBridge Amide column) and RPC (BEH Shield RP18 column) achieved the hydrophilic interaction and hydrophobic interaction separations, respectively. Q-Orbitrap mass spectrometry offered rich structural information and complementary resolution to the co-eluting components, particular to those minor ones by including precursor ion lists in data-dependent acquisition. We could characterize 803 ginsenosides from PGF, 795 from PQF, and 833 from PNF, and 1561 thereof are potentially unknown. These results can indicate the great potential of this multidimensional approach in the ultra-deep characterization of complex herbal samples supporting the efficient discovery of potentially novel natural compounds.