Title: An accelerated approach for mechanistic model based prediction of linear gradient elution ion-exchange chromatography of proteins

Abstract: With growing demands for therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, in silico downstream process development based on mechanistic modeling of chromatography separation process is being increasingly used for process optimization and process characterization. Application of mechanistic modeling in biopharmaceutical industry has been sparse due to the significant investment of time and resources that are required for performing model calibration. Mechanistic modeling of the chromatography process involves a large number of mass transport and binding parameters and their initial input values are required for simulations. These input values of column parameters can be easily obtained either from experiments or from empirical correlations available in literature. On the other hand, obtaining the model input valves for binding kinetic parameters is usually a cumbersome process as it involves performing batch experiments which are not only tedious but also require significant quantities of purely isolated main product and its related impurities, which is challenging as the product related impurities are typically present in smaller quantities and hence are difficult to obtain as pure species. In the present work, a mechanistic model that is based on the general rate model coupled with extended Langmuir binding model has been used for prediction of linear gradient elution peaks of monoclonal antibody on cation exchanger chromatography. The present work describes an accelerated approach for obtaining the input values for binding kinetic parameters in the extended Langmuir binding model from the two Yamamoto coefficient A and B values obtained by Yamamoto method directly from the model calibration linear gradient elution runs of different gradient slopes and at low to moderate protein loadings. The equations that can relate the two coefficients to the extended Langmuir model equation binding kinetic parameters were derived. Therefore, once A and B are determined, the binding kinetic parameter values were determined straightforward, thereby avoiding the problem of multiple solutions for the model parameters. The estimated binding parameters were successfully validated from isocratic elution experiments performed at low loading. What we demonstrate is that the proposed approach allows us to estimate binding kinetic parameters in a significantly more efficient and accelerated manner than presently used approaches, thereby accelerating development and implementation of mechanistic modeling for process chromatography.