Title: Development of a targeted hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry based lipidomics platform applied to a coronavirus disease severity study

Abstract: The importance of lipids seen in studies of metabolism, cancer, the recent COVID-19 pandemic and other diseases has brought the field of lipidomics to the forefront of clinical research. Quantitative and comprehensive analysis is required to understand biological interactions among lipid species. However, lipidomic analysis is often challenging due to the various compositional structures, diverse physicochemical properties, and wide dynamic range of concentrations of lipids in biological systems. To study the comprehensive lipidome, a hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HILIC-MS/MS)-based screening method with 1200 lipid features across 19 (sub)classes, including both nonpolar and polar lipids, has been developed. HILIC-MS/MS was selected due to its class separation property and fatty acyl chain level information. 3D models of class chromatographic retention behavior were established and evaluations of cross-class and within-class interferences were performed to avoid over-reporting these features. This targeted HILIC-MS/MS method was fully validated, with acceptable analytical parameters in terms of linearity, precision, reproducibility, and recovery. The accurate quantitation of 608 lipid species in the SRM 1950 NIST plasma was achieved using multi-internal standards per class and post-hoc correction, extending current databases by providing lipid concentrations resolved at fatty acyl chain level. The overall correlation coefficients (R
                     2) of measured concentrations with values from literature range from 0.64 to 0.84. The applicability of the developed targeted lipidomics method was demonstrated by discovering 520 differential lipid features related to COVID-19 severity. This high coverage and targeted approach will aid in future investigations of the lipidome in various disease contexts.