Title: Optimization and troubleshooting of preparative liquid chromatography using statistical design of experiments: Four small-molecule case studies

Abstract: Statistical design of experiments (DoE) is used to aid in the development and execution of preparative liquid chromatography (LC) for large-scale purification of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) and pharmaceutical intermediates. Four purification case studies were undertaken. In case study 1, a normal phase preparative silica method is developed and modeled. After initial method screening, DoE results were used to set mobile phase composition, flowrate, and sample diluent. Of the three particle sizes studied (10 µm, 20 µm, 50 µm) only 10 µm silica resin was able to produce purified API at the yield (>96%) and productivity (> 1 kg/kg-resin/day) necessitated by the project. The second case study uses DoE studies to identify critical process parameters of column load, mobile phase solvent ratio and basic modifier level for a low-resolution, preparative, chiral separation. Trade-offs between purity, yield and productivity are quantified in a tight separation which made compromising on process outcomes a necessity. The third case study troubleshoots a loss of yield experienced during operation of a process-scale reverse-phase LC purification. DoE is used to identify a critical interaction between levels of acetonitrile and phosphoric acid in the mobile phase. An operating region which increased yield from around 85% to 97% was defined and implemented. The fourth case study was initially designed as a preparative chromatography purification of API. DoE was used to screen mobile phase solubility. These experiments uncovered conditions where API is soluble, and impurities are not. The solubility model in acetonitrile/water mixtures is further defined via a response surface DoE. The resulting targeted solvent mixture allows bulk purification via dissolution of API while three less-polar impurities remain in the solid phase and are removed by filtration. These four case studies demonstrate the efficiency of DoE and response surface modeling as tools for process development and optimization.