Title: Preparative separation of iridoid glucosides and crocins from Gardeniae Fructus using sequential macroporous resin column chromatography and evaluation of their anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities

Abstract: Iridoid glycosides (geniposide (GP), genipin-1-gentiobioside (GB), etc.) and crocins (crocin Ⅰ (CR1), crocin Ⅱ(CR2), etc.) are two main bioactive components in Gardeniae Fructus (GF), which is a famous traditional Chinese medicine. Iridoid glycosides exhibit many activities and are used to manufacture gardenia blue pigment for the food industry. Crocins are rare natural water-soluble carotenoids that are often used as food colorants. A sequential macroporous resin column chromatography technology composed of HC-500B and HC-900B resins was developed to selectively separate iridoid glucosides and crocins from GF. The adsorption of GP on HC-900B resin was an exothermic process. The adsorption of CR1 on HC-500B resin was an endothermic process. The two kinds of components were completely separated by a sequential resin column. GB and GP were mainly found in product 1 (P1) with purities of 11.38% and 46.83%, respectively, while CR1 and CR2 were mainly found in product 2 (P2) with purities of 12.32% and 1.40%, respectively. The recovery yields of all the compounds were more than 80%. The above results showed that sequential resin column chromatography technology achieved high selectivity and recovery yields. GF extract, P1 and P2 could significantly inhibit the secretion of nitric oxide (NO), tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced RAW264.7 cells, indicating that iridoid glycosides and crocins provide a greater contribution to the anti-inflammatory activity of GF. At the same time, compared to the GF extract and P1, P2 exhibited stronger scavenging activities against 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and 2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) radicals, indicating that crocins may provide a significant contribution to the antioxidant activity of GF.