Title: [Development progress of stationary phase for supercritical fluid chromatography and related application in natural products].

Abstract: Supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC) is an environment-friendly and efficient column chromatography technology that was developed to expand the application range of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a supercritical fluid as the mobile phase. A supercritical fluid has a temperature and pressure that are above the critical values as well as relatively dynamic characteristics that are between those of a gas and liquid. Supercritical fluids combine the advantages of high solubility and diffusion, as their diffusion and viscosity coefficients are equivalent to those of a gas, while maintaining a density that is comparable with that of a liquid. Owing to the remarkable compressibility of supercritical fluids, analyte retention in SFC is significantly influenced by the density of the mobile phase. Thus, the column temperature and back pressure are crucial variables that regulate analyte retention in SFC. Increasing the back pressure can increase the density and solubility of the mobile phase, leading to reductions in retention time. The column temperature can affect selectivity and retention, and the degree to which different analytes are affected by this property varies. On the one hand, increasing the temperature reduces the density of the mobile phase, thereby extending the retention time of the analytes; on the other hand, it can also increase the energy of molecules, leading to a shorter retention time of the analyte on the stationary phase. CO&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt;, the most widely employed supercritical fluid to date, presents moderate critical conditions and, more importantly, is miscible with a variety of polar organic solvents, including small quantities of water. In comparison with the mobile phases used in normal-phase liquid chromatography (NPLC) and reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC), the mobile phase for SFC has a polarity that can be extended over a wide range on account of its extensive miscibility. The compatibility of the mobile phase determines the diversity of the stationary phase. Nearly all stationary phases for HPLC, including the nonpolar stationary phases commonly used for RPLC and the polar stationary phases commonly used for NPLC, can be applied to SFC. Because all stationary phases can use the same mobile-phase composition, chromatographic columns with completely different polarities can be employed in SFC. The selectivity of SFC has been effectively expanded, and the technique can be used for the separation of diverse analytes ranging from lipid compounds to polar compounds such as flavonoids, saponins, and peptides. The choice of stationary phase has a great impact on the separation effect of analytes in SFC. As new stationary phases for HPLC are constantly investigated, specialized stationary phases for SFC have also been continuously developed. Researchers have discovered that polar stationary phases containing nitrogen heterocycles such as 2-EP and PIC are highly suitable for SFC because they can effectively manage the peak shape of alkaline compounds and provide good selectivity in separating acidic and neutral compounds.The development of various stationary phases has promoted the applications of SFC in numerous fields such as pharmaceuticals, food production, environmental protection, and natural products. In particular, natural products have specific active skeletons, multiple active groups, and excellent biological activity; hence, these materials can provide many new opportunities for the discovery of novel drugs. According to reports, compounds related to natural products account for 80% of all commercial drugs. However, natural products are among the most challenging compounds to separate because of their complex composition and low concentration of active ingredients. Thus, superior chromatographic methods are required to enable the qualitative and quantitative analysis of natural products. Thanks to technological improvements and a good theoretical framework, the benefits of SFC are gradually becoming more apparent, and its use in separating natural products is expanding. Indeed, in the past 50 years, SFC has developed into a widely used and efficient separation technology. This article provides a brief overview of the characteristics, advantages, and development process of SFC; reviews the available SFC stationary phases and their applications in natural products over the last decade; and discusses prospects on the future development of SFC.