Title: Glutathione affinity chromatography for the scalable purification of an oncolytic virus immunotherapy from microcarrier cell culture.

Abstract: Therapeutic viral vectors are an emerging technology with several clinical applications in gene therapy, vaccines, and immunotherapy. Increased demand has required the redevelopment of conventional, low-throughput cell culture and purification manufacturing methods such as static cell stacks and ultracentrifugation. In this work, scalable methods were investigated for the manufacture of an oncolytic virus immunotherapy application consisting of a prototype strain of coxsackievirus A21 (CVA21) produced in adherent MRC-5 cells. Cell culture was established in stirred-tank microcarrier bioreactors, and an efficient affinity chromatography method was developed for the purification of harvested CVA21 through binding of the viral capsids to an immobilized glutathione (GSH) ligand. Bioreactor temperature during infection was investigated to maximize titer, and a decrease in temperature from 37\xc2\xb0C to 34\xc2\xb0C yielded a two-three-fold increase in infectivity. After purification of the 34\xc2\xb0C harvests, the GSH affinity chromatography elution not only maintained a &gt;two-fold increase in infectivity and viral genomes but also increased the proportion of empty capsids compared to 37\xc2\xb0C harvests. Using material generated from both infection temperature setpoints, chromatographic parameters and mobile phase compositions were studied at the laboratory scale to maximize infectious particle yields and cell culture impurity clearance. Empty capsids that co-eluted with full capsids from 34\xc2\xb0C infection temperature harvests were poorly resolved across the conditions tested, but subsequent polishing anion exchange and cation exchange chromatography steps were developed to clear residual empty capsids and other impurities. Oncolytic CVA21 production was scaled-up 75-fold from the laboratory scale and demonstrated across seven batches in 250\xc2\xa0L single-use microcarrier bioreactors and purified with customized, prepacked, single-use 1.5\xc2\xa0L GSH affinity chromatography columns. The large-scale bioreactors controlled at 34\xc2\xb0C during infection maintained a three-fold increase in productivity in the GSH elution, and excellent clearance of host cell and media impurities was observed across all batches. This study presents a robust method for the manufacture of an oncolytic virus immunotherapy application that may be implemented for the scalable production of other viruses and viral vectors which interact with glutathione.