Title: Simultaneous Analysis of Organic Acids, Glycerol and Phenolic Acids in Wines Using Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry.

Abstract: Fermented beverages, particularly wines, exhibit variable concentrations of organic and phenolic acids, posing challenges in their accurate determination. Traditionally, enzymatic methods or chromatographic analyses, mainly high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), have been employed to quantify these compounds individually in the grape must or wine. However, chromatographic analyses face limitations due to the high sugar content in the grape must. Meanwhile, phenolic acids, found in higher quantities in red wines than in white wines, are typically analyzed using HPLC. This study presents a novel method for the quantification of organic acids (OAs), glycerol, and phenolic acids in grape musts and wines. The approach involves liquid-liquid extraction with ethyl acetate, followed by sample derivatization and analysis using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) in selected ion monitoring (SIM) detection mode. The results indicated successful detection and quantification of all analyzed compounds without the need for sample dilution. However, our results showed that the method of adding external standards was more suitable for quantifying wine compounds, owing to the matrix effect. Furthermore, this method is promising for quantifying other metabolites present in wines, depending on their extractability with ethyl acetate. Fermented beverages, particularly wines, exhibit variable concentrations of organic and phenolic acids, posing challenges in their accurate determination. Traditionally, enzymatic methods or chromatographic analyses, mainly high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), have been employed to quantify these compounds individually in the grape must or wine. The approach of this proposed method involves (i) methoximation of wine compounds in a basic medium, (ii) acidification with HCl, (iii) liquid-liquid extraction with ethyl acetate, and (iv) silyl derivatization to analyze samples with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) in ion monitoring detection mode (SIM). The results indicated successful detection and quantification of all analyzed compounds without the need for sample dilution. However, our results showed that the method of adding external standards was more suitable for quantifying wine compounds, owing to the matrix effect. Furthermore, this method is promising for quantifying other metabolites present in wines, depending on their extractability with ethyl acetate. In other words, the proposed method may be suitable for profiling (targeted) or fingerprinting (untargeted) strategies to quantify wine metabolites or to classify wines according to the type of winemaking process, grape, or fermentation.