Title: Potential Application of Yeast Cell Wall Biopolymers as Probiotic Encapsulants.

Abstract: Biopolymers of yeast cell walls, such as \xce\xb2-glucan, mannoprotein, and chitin, may serve as viable encapsulants for probiotics. Due to its thermal stability, \xce\xb2-glucan is a suitable cryoprotectant for probiotic microorganisms during freeze-drying. Mannoprotein has been shown to increase the adhesion of probiotic microorganisms to intestinal epithelial cells. Typically, chitin is utilized in the form of its derivatives, particularly chitosan, which is derived via deacetylation. Brewery waste has shown potential as a source of \xce\xb2-glucan that can be optimally extracted through thermolysis and sonication to yield up to 14% \xce\xb2-glucan, which can then be processed with protease and spray drying to achieve utmost purity. While laminarinase and sodium deodecyle sulfate were used to isolate and extract mannoproteins and glucanase was used to purify them, hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide precipitation was used to improve the amount of purified mannoproteins to 7.25 percent. The maximum chitin yield of 2.4% was attained by continuing the acid-alkali reaction procedure, which was then followed by dialysis and lyophilization. Separation and purification of yeast cell wall biopolymers via diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) anion exchange chromatography can be used to increase the purity of \xce\xb2-glucan, whose purity in turn can also be increased using concanavalin-A chromatography based on the glucan/mannan ratio. In the meantime, mannoproteins can be purified via affinity chromatography that can be combined with zymolase treatment. Then, dialysis can be continued to obtain chitin with high purity. \xce\xb2-glucans, mannoproteins, and chitosan-derived yeast cell walls have been shown to promote the survival of probiotic microorganisms in the digestive tract. In addition, the prebiotic activity of \xce\xb2-glucans and mannoproteins can combine with microorganisms to form synbiotics.