Title: Identification and validation of diagnostic biomarkers for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy based on untargeted and targeted metabolomics analyses of urine metabolite profiles.

Abstract: &lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a prevalent pregnancy-specific complication that presents with maternal itching and elevated serum bile acid levels. ICP is associated with unfavorable pregnancy outcomes, severely decreasing the pregnant woman\'s quality of life. Timely identification of ICP is crucial for effective management and improved outcomes.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We collected urine samples from 8 patients with ICP and 8 healthy individuals. We used Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) to detect metabolite expression levels, then conducted a series of bioinformatic analyses to explore the potential biological meanings of differentially expressed metabolites, and preliminarily discovered several candidate biomarkers. To validate these candidate biomarkers, we performed Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) detection and analyzed their diagnostic values using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Untargeted metabolomics data showed that 6129 positive peaks and 6218 negative peaks were extracted from each specimen. OPLS-DA analysis and the heat map for cluster analysis showed satisfactory capability in discriminating ICP specimens from controls. Subsequent analysis extracted 64 significantly differentially expressed metabolites, which could be potential biomarkers for diagnosis of ICP. Based on the KEGG enrichment analyses, six candidate biomarkers were preliminarily identified. Two most promising biomarkers (3-hydroxypropionic acid and uracil) were validated by targeted metabolomics analyses with the area under the curve (AUC) of 0.920 and 0.850 respectively.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Based on preliminary screening from untargeted metabolomics and subsequent validation through targeted metabolomics, 3-hydroxypropionic acid and uracil were identified as promising diagnostic biomarkers for ICP.