Title: Experimental investigation of hydrocarbon-ion interaction in water-oil emulsions: A new insight into asphaltene structure and chemistry

Abstract: Emulsification has been proved as one of the mechanisms contributing to improving oil recovery. Regarding the amphiphilic nature of the asphaltene and other polar hydrocarbons, their role should be understood. This research aims to investigate the chemistry and structure of the asphaltene molecules in the emulsions generated by the oil and ion-tuned water. The static bottle tests, containing the aqueous, emulsion, and bulk oil phases, were generated to study the emulsification. To have a mechanistic insight into the participation of asphaltene molecules in the emulsion phase, two oil samples of crude oil and asphaltene-rich toluene were used to generate the emulsions. After extracting the asphaltene from the bulk phases, the analytical techniques of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), and Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) were employed to study the asphaltene structural parameters, functional groups, and elemental content, respectively. Based on the NMR technique, the asphaltenes with smaller aromatic cores and shorter aliphatic chains, which contain polar functional groups have more tendency to adsorb onto the emulsion phase. It was shown that the magnesium and calcium ions have stronger electrostatic interactions with the asphaltene, leading to more attraction of the asphaltenes in the emulsion phase. In contrast, the sulfate ions showed a weaker attraction force to adsorb the asphaltenes in the emulsion phase. Based on the EDX spectroscopy, the heteroatom (oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur) contents of the crude asphaltene is more than the bulk one, representing more affinity of the polar asphaltenes toward the emulsion phase. According to the FTIR spectroscopy of the bulk oil, while the aromatic hydrocarbons have a lower affinity toward the emulsion phase, the longer alkanes have more affinity to adsorb onto the emulsion phase. It should be mentioned that the chemistry and structural parameters of the bulk asphaltenes in the emulsions, which were generated by crude oil and asphaltene-rich toluene, were different. This observation indicated that the chemistry of the asphaltenes participating in the emulsion phase is influenced by the presence of other amphiphilic hydrocarbons. In this study, it was shown that chemical functional groups and structural parameters of asphaltene affect the emulsification process. Hence, studying the chemistry of asphaltene and other polar hydrocarbons is a vital step for the formulation of optimum ion-tuned water.