Title: Smart chemistry and applied perceptions of enzyme-coupled nano-engineered assemblies to meet future biocatalytic challenges

Abstract: Enzymes have received extensive research due to their high selectivity, efficiency, and environmental protection. However, the lack of stability and reusability drastically hinders the advancement of various enzyme-mediated applications. To assure functionality and the potential for enzyme recycling after use, the immobilization of enzymes has been significantly demanded in a broad range of industrial applications. Nano biocatalyst is a recently developed catalyst that synergistically combines biotechnology and modern nanotechnology. It provides attractive possibilities for enhancing enzyme activity, stability, capability, and engineering performances in biotechnological processes. Due to their large interfacial area, greater activity, and long-term sustainability, nanostructured materials have been shown to be effective substrates for the immobilization of enzymes. In order to increase enzymatic activity as a biocatalyst in various bio-medical fields, food and chemical industries, as well as in bio-sensing and degradation of environmental pollutants, different carbon-based nanostructures coated with various polymeric materials have been studied as carriers for enzyme immobilization. Co-immobilization, which relates to the concurrent immobilization of two or more enzymes, has also been highlighted. The significance of this study can aid in enhancing the efficacy, viability, and economics of numerous industrial processes that rely on enzymatic reactions. This article highlights the various approaches and purposes established in this domain and the quick progress made to design isolation technologies that are more effective, durable, and long-lasting for a wide range of applications & enzymes. Diffusion limitations, leaching, cost, loss of activity and scalability are some problems related to this technique. This review provides a comprehensive point of view on enzyme immobilization that compresses a critical analysis of immobilization techniques and carriers, biocatalytic matrices, the influence of vital carrier characteristics on biocatalyst performance, trends toward nanotechnology, and in-depth case studies that are reflective of biocatalysis trying to promote sustainable development. Finally, the challenges in using nanostructures to immobilize enzymes and their potential in the future have been discussed.