Title: Soil disturbance, amelioration and rehabilitation affect forest growth, health, soil carbon and chemistry on five long-term soil productivity (LTSP) sites in southeastern British Columbia

Abstract: Soil disturbance amelioration affected tree survival, growth, health, mineral soil chemistry, and their covariation on five Long-Term Soil Productivity (LTSP) sites in southeastern British Columbia. The two most different LTSP treatments (baseline disturbance of no compaction / all organic matter left, versus most severe of heavy compaction / forest floor removed) were compared to five amelioration treatments: rehabilitation of most severe LTSP treatment (soil tillage with or without incorporation of removed forest floor [Rehab + FF]), root disease (Armillaria ostoyae (Romagn.) Herink) amelioration treatments (stump removal or biological with Hypholoma fasiculare), and enhancement of soil organic matter (tilling extra forest floor into mineral soil). Treatment significantly (p < 0.05) affected 10-year mineral soil carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, mineralizable nitrogen, and potassium, which were lower on forest floor removal treatments and higher on forest floor addition treatments (27 to 97% of baseline versus 78 to 183% of baseline, respectively). Western white pine (Pinus monticola Dougl. ex D.Don) 15-year productivity (m3/ha) was significantly affected by treatment (Rehab + FF yielding a 10 fold increase in productivity versus the poorly growing baseline treatment), with treatment also significant when total disease was a covariate and for average and total volume when mineral soil Ca:Al ratio was a marginally significant (p < 0.1) covariate, and for survival when the incidence of total disease or white pine blister rust (Cronartium ribicola) were significant covariates; or with mineral soil C:N ratio as a significant covariate. The incidence of blister rust and total disease were significantly influenced by treatment when C:N was a significant covariate. For 20-year lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta Dougl. Ex Loud) there were no direct relationships apparent, but western gall rust (Endocronartium harknessii) had treatment significant when total sulfur was a significant covariate. Fifteen- and twenty-year Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii var. glauca [Beissn.] Franco) had no significant relationships. Results demonstrate that restoring or adding extra organic matter (forest floor) into mineral soil increased soil carbon and related nutrients and can increase above ground carbon (forest productivity). Conversely, removing forest floor lowered mineral soil carbon and generally lowered tree volume. Varied effects due to growth limiting factors like frost and competing vegetation affected results on a few plots. Recommendations include leaving or enhancing organic matter onsite for soil carbon, nutrients, forest health and site productivity. Further analysis with the larger LTSP dataset and ongoing monitoring is encouraged to determine if the results persist in the long-term and to better understand the significant covariate relationships.