Title: Point-of-Care Chemistry-Guided Dialysate Adjustment to Reduce Arrhythmias: A Pilot Trial

Abstract: Introduction
                  Excessive dialytic potassium (K) and acid removal are risk factors for arrhythmias; however, treatment-to-treatment dialysate modification is rarely performed. We conducted a multicenter, pilot randomized study to test the safety, feasibility, and efficacy of 4 point-of-care (POC) chemistry-guided protocols to adjust dialysate K and bicarbonate (HCO3) in outpatient hemodialysis (HD) clinics.
               
                  Methods
                  Participants received implantable cardiac loop monitors and crossed over to four 4-week periods with adjustment of dialysate K or HCO3 at each treatment according to pre-HD POC values: (i) K-removal minimization, (ii) K-removal maximization, (iii) Acidosis avoidance, and (iv) Alkalosis avoidance. The primary end point was percentage of treatments adhering to the intervention algorithm. Secondary endpoints included pre-HD K and HCO variability, adverse events, and rates of clinically significant arrhythmias (CSAs).
               
                  Results
                  Nineteen subjects were enrolled in the study. HD staff completed POC testing and correctly adjusted the dialysate in 604 of 708 (85%) of available HD treatments. There was 1 K ≤3, 29 HCO3 <20 and 2 HCO3 >32 mEq/l and no serious adverse events related to study interventions. Although there were no significant differences between POC results and conventional laboratory measures drawn concurrently, intertreatment K and HCO3 variability was high. There were 45 CSA events; most were transient atrial fibrillation (AF), with numerically fewer events during the alkalosis avoidance period (8) and K-removal maximization period (3) compared to other intervention periods (17). There were no significant differences in CSA duration among interventions.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Algorithm-guided K/HCO3 adjustment based on POC testing is feasible. The variability of intertreatment K and HCO3 suggests that a POC-laboratory-guided algorithm could markedly alter dialysate-serum chemistry gradients. Definitive end point-powered trials should be considered.