Title: Refined views of ancient ocean chemistry: Tracking trace element incorporation in pyrite framboids using atom probe tomography

Abstract: The trace element chemistry of pyrite can be used to determine the origin, timing, and conditions of formation of ore deposits; as a vectoring tool for mineral exploration; and to determine the evolution of the Earth’s oceanic and atmospheric chemistry. However, little is known about whether trace elements are held with the pyrite structure or within nano-inclusions of other phases. This distinction is important for two primary reasons. First, trace element incorporation into the pyrite structure can affect the partitioning of other trace elements. Second, if trace elements are held within nano-inclusions, the partition coefficient of the mineral phases that make up the nano-inclusion, rather than pyrite, are the critical consideration in related interpretations. Previous studies addressing this topic have used laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry; however, the resulting data do not provide sufficient spatial resolution to delineate trace element distributions unless the inclusions are large. Further, they use these flat element profiles in time resolved laser ablation output graphs to argue that pyrite trace element content provides a direct relationship between trace element content of seawater and pyrite trace element content. To improve resolution, we have used atom probe tomography to characterize trace element distributions in pyrite framboids from the Cariaco Basin and Demerara Rise in three-dimensions at sub-nanometer resolution. Manganese was found to be concentrated in the pyrite nanocrystal part of the original framboid structure. In contrast, Ni was mostly found along the grain boundary, though it still appeared to be contained within the pyrite structure. Copper was concentrated in later pyrite overgrowths, and As varied in its location. These observations suggest that some important trace elements are incorporated into pyrite during early diagenesis, even in euxinic settings dominated by water-column pyrite formation. Statistical analysis was used to determine whether trace elements were incorporated in the lattice or within nanoscale inclusions (referred to here are nano-inclusions). We found that As, Ni, Cu, and Mn were commonly held within the pyrite structure, but As, Ni, and Cu can also be held as nano-inclusions or within grain interfaces. Incorporation of As is known to enhance the incorporation of other trace elements and in this case appears to correlated to elevated Ni and Cu concentrations in the Cariaco Basin samples. Understanding these relationships strongly impacts our ability to utilize pyrite trace metal concentrations to analyze and quantify early ocean chemistry and its evolution through time.