Title: Utilization of EPRI ChemWorks tools for PWR shutdown chemistry evolution modeling

Abstract: Shutdown chemistry evolution is performed in nuclear power plants at each refueling outage (RFO) to establish safe conditions to open system and minimize inventory of corrosion products in the reactor coolant system (RCS). After hydrogen peroxide is added to RCS during shutdown chemistry evolution, corrosion products are released and are removed by filters and ion exchange resins in the chemical volume control system (CVCS). Shutdown chemistry evolution including RCS clean-up time to remove released corrosion products impacts the critical path schedule during RFOs. The estimation of clean-up time prior to RFO can provide more reliable actions for RCS clean-up operations and transients to operators during shutdown chemistry. Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) shutdown calculator (SDC) enables to provide clean-up time by Co-58 peak activity through operational data from nuclear power plants (NPPs).
                  In this study, we have investigated the results of EPRI SDC by shutdown chemistry data of Co-58 activity using NPP data from previous cycles and modeled the estimated clean-up time by EPRI SDC using average Co-58 activity of the NPP. We selected two RFO data from the NPP to evaluate EPRI SDC results using the purification time to reach to 1.3 μCi/cc of Co-58 after hydrogen peroxide addition. Comparing two RFO data, the similar purification time between actual and computed data by EPRI SDC, 0.92 and 1.74 h respectively, was observed with the deviation of 3.7–7.2%. As the modeling the estimated clean-up time, we calculated average Co-58 peak concentration for normal cycles after cycle 10 and applied two-sigma (2σ, 95.4%) for predicted Co-58 peak concentration as upper and lower values compared to the average data. For the verification of modeling, shutdown chemistry data for RFO 17 was used. Predicted RCS clean-up time with lower and upper values was between 21.05 and 27.58 h, and clean-up time for RFO 17 was 24.75 h, within the predicted time band. Therefore, our calculated modeling band was validated. This approach can be identified that the advantage of the modeling for clean-up time with SDC is that the primary prediction of shutdown chemistry plans can be performed more reliably during shutdown chemistry. This research can contribute to improving the efficiency and safety of shutdown chemistry evolution in nuclear power plants.