Title: High-order methods for hypersonic flows with strong shocks and real chemistry

Abstract: We compare high-order methods including spectral difference (SD), flux reconstruction (FR), the entropy-stable discontinuous Galerkin spectral element method (ES-DGSEM), modal discontinuous Galerkin methods, and WENO to select the best candidate to simulate strong shock waves characteristic of hypersonic flows. We consider several benchmarks, including the Leblanc and modified shock-density wave interaction problems that require robust stabilization and positivity-preserving properties for a successful flow realization. We also perform simulations of the three-species Sod problem with simplified chemistry with the chemical reaction source terms introduced in the Euler equations. The ES-DGSEM scheme exhibits the highest stability, negligible numerical oscillations, and requires the least computational effort in resolving reactive flow regimes with strong shock waves. Therefore, we extend the ES-DGSEM to hypersonic Euler equations by deriving a new set of two-point entropy conservative fluxes for a five-species gas model. In this paper, hypersonic Euler equations refer to the multi-species Euler equations for which the internal energy and thermodynamic properties are computed using the Rigid-Rotor Harmonic-Oscillator model. Stabilization for capturing strong shock waves occurs by blending high-order entropy conservative fluxes with low-order finite volume fluxes constructed using the HLLC Riemann solver. The hypersonic Euler solver is verified using the non-equilibrium chemistry Sod problem. To this end, we adopt the Mutation++ library to compute the reaction source terms, thermodynamic properties, and transport coefficients. We also investigate the effect of real chemistry versus ideal chemistry, and the results demonstrate that the ideal chemistry assumption fails at high temperatures, hence real chemistry must be employed for accurate predictions. Finally, we consider a viscous hypersonic flow problem to verify the transport coefficients and reaction source terms determined by the Mutation++ library.